# Explanatory material

Each part corresponds to a part in the *How to execute object files* series.

## [Part 1](https://blog.cloudflare.com/how-to-execute-an-object-file-part-1)

Compilation is a multi-stage process. First, the source code is compiled into machine code, which is saved in object files, afterwards, the linker assembles all object files into a single working program and binds references together. The output of a linker is an executable file.

Today, executables are also dynamically linked, which means all code is not present during compile time, instead, the code is "borrowed" during runtime from shared libraries.

Runtime linking is done by the OS, which invokes the dynamic loader. The dynamic loader finds the shared libraries, maps them to the process's address space, and resolves all dependencies our code has on them.

### Loading an object file into the process memory

First, create a `obj.c` file with simple functions and compile it into an object file with `gcc -c obj.c`.

Executing the object file is the same as using it as a library. Since we do not use dynamic linking, the dynamic loader will not load the object file for us, we must do this manually. The object file needs to be loaded into the RAM.

At this stage, the object file is simply mapped into memory. To do this, `mmap` is used, so the OS lazily reads the file when needed. Afterwards, we need to parse the object file, which is actually an ELF file.

### Parsing ELF files

Segments and sections are the main parts of an ELF file. Different sections contain different types of ELF data: executable code, constant data, global variables, etc. Segments don't contain any data, they give directions to the OS, so it correctly loads the sections into the RAM. They explain where to load the sections into the RAM and the access pattern.

Futhermore, object files do not contain any segments, since the ELF segments are generated by the linker, not the compiler.

`readelf --segments ` and `readelf --sections` can be used to read ELF files.

Short descriptions of various ELF sections:

- `.text`: contains the executable code. This section is the primary area of interest for us.
- `.data` and `.bss`: contains global and static local variables. The `.data` section contains variables with an initial value, `.bss` just reserves space for variables with no initial value.
- `.rodata`: contains constant data, mostly string and byte arrays. Can be missing if no strings are used.
- `.symtab`: information about the symbols in the object file, including external symbols if they are present.
- `.strtab` and `.shstrtab`: contains packed strings for the ELF file. These are strings describing the names of other ELF structures, like symbols from `.symtab` or section names. All strings are stored in one place, and their respective data structures just reference them as an offset in either `.strtab` or `.shstrtab`, instead of storing the full string locally.

### The `.symtab` section

Our functions are stored in the `.text` sections, but since the section is just a byte blob, we need to extract the locations of each function. To do this, we use the `.symtab` section. `readelf --symbols` can come in handy to read and visualize it.

The output of `readelf` command has various fields. The Ndx column tells us to which section the symbol belongs. The other important column is Value, which tells us the offset from the start of the containing section.

### Finding and executing a function

The plan to execute a function:

1. Find ELF sections table and `.shstrtab` section (to lookup sections in the section table).
2. Find the `.symtab` and `.strtab` (to lookup symbols by name in the symbols table) sections.
3. Find the `.text` section and copy it into the RAM with executable permissions.
4. Find function offsets in the symbol table.
5. Execute the functions.

In part 3 we need to copy the `.txt` section into RAM and add execute permissions. This is done for multiple reasons:

- Many CPUs don't allow or are slow at executing unaligned memory (4 kB for x86). The `.txt` section is not guaranteed to be page aligned.
- We may need to modify some bytes in the section to perform relocations.
- Each section needs to have its own permissions, and as such, each page in memory needs those permissions. This is why we need to relocate and align the memory. Therefore, we need to create new page-aligned memory ranges and copy the data there.

## [Part 2](https://blog.cloudflare.com/how-to-execute-an-object-file-part-2)

The two functions used in the previous example are completely self contained, meaning their output was computed solely based on the input, without any external code. Additional steps are needed to handle code with some dependencies.

### Handling relocations

If we use the `add5` functions inside the `add10` function, to calculate add 10, the result is not correct. 

Its time to analyze the `obj.o` file with `objdump --disassemble --section=.text obj.o`. The two important lines are the `e8 00 00 00 00` lines. Both are a `callq` assembly instructions, which is a near, relative call.

This variant of the call instruction consist of 5 bytes: the `0xe8` prefix and a 4-byte argument. The argument is the distance between the function we want to call and the current position(actually the next instruction).

The position of the two calls are `0x1f and 0x2c`. In the first case the argument is calculated as `0x0 - 0x24 = -0x24`. Since negatives are presented by their two's complement, the representation should be `0xffffffdc` and for the second call it would be `0xffffffcf`.

But the compiler does not calculate the correct argument. The compiler just leaves them at `0x00000000`. Let's try if our hypothesis is correct, by patching our loaded .text copy before executing it.

### Relocations

The problem with our toy object file is that both functions are declared with external linkage-the default setting for all functions and globals in C. The compiler is not sure where the add5 code will end up in the target binary. As such the compiler avoids making any assumptions and doesn't calculate the relative offset argument of the call insturctions. Let's try this by declaring the add5 fuction as `static`.

Now that the function is declared with internal linkeage, the compiler calculates the argument. Note that x86 is little endian. Also note that, since we can still call the static function inside the loader, the `static` keyword should not be used as a security feature to hide APIs from potential malicious users.

With external linkage, the compiler doesn't calculate the argument and leaving the calculation to the linker. But the linker needs some kind of clues to calculate it, this clues are called **relocations**. The relocatinos can be inspected with `readlef` by using `readelf --sections obj.o`.

We can find that the compiler created a `.rela.text` section, by convention, all relative sections have a `.rela` appendix.

To examine the relocations we use `readelf --relocs obj.o`. There are two relocation sections `.rela.eh_frame` and `.real.text`. The `.rela.eh_frame` section can be ignored this time.

Let's analyse the `.rela.text` section:

- *Offset* column tells us exactly where in the target section(.text in this case) the fix/adjustment is needed.
- *Info* is a combined value: the upper 32 bits - only 16 bits are shown in the output above - represent the index of the symbol in the symbol table, with respect to which the relocation si preformed. In our example it is 8 and if we run `readelf --symbols` we will see that it points to an entry corresponding to the add5 function. The lower 32 bits(4 in our case) is a relocation type
- *Type* describes the relocation type. This is a pseudo-column: readelf actually generates it from the lower 32bits of the *Info* field. Different relocation types have different formulas we need to apply to perform the relocation.
- *Sym. Value* may mean different things based on the relocation type, but most of the time it is the symbol offset with respect to which we perform the relocation.
- *Addend* is a constant we may need to use in the relocation formula. Depending on the relocation type, readelf actually adds the decoded symbol name to the output, so the column name is `Sym. Name + Addend` above but the actual field sotres the addend only.

In a nutshell. these entries tell us what we need to patch the `.text` section at offsets `0x20` and `0x2d`. To calculate it we apply the formula for `R_X86_64_PLT32` relocation. Based on [this](https://refspecs.linuxfoundation.org/elf/x86_64-abi-0.95.pdf) ELF specification, the result of our relocation is word32. The formula we use is L + A - P, where:

- L is the address of the symbol, with respect to which the relocation is performed(add5 in our case).
- A is the constant addend(4 in our case).
- P is the address/offset, where we store the result of the relocation.

When the relocation formula references some symbol addresses or offsets, we shoudl use the actual - runtime in our case - addresses in the calculations. For example we use `text_runtime_base + 0x2d` as P for the second relocation and not just 0x2d.

Now we just implement this in the loader.

Our relocation also involved `text_runtime_base` address, which is not available at compile time. That's why the compiler could not calculate the call arguments in the first place and had to emit the relocations instead.
